[Music]
okay it's not actually a sphere and it
wasn't always blue inside it's solid
gold but its surface is covered in
viruses sound weird I'm actually talking
about the place you call home
now not your apartment planet Earth it
turns out is hiding a lot of seriously
freaky by fascinating things about
itself days are becoming longer because
of the effect the moon has on earth our
planet is gradually rotating slower and
slower world and I mean very gradually
at around 17 milliseconds every 100
years so it'll take 140 million years
before the world can add a single extra
hour to its day but that also means that
when the dinosaurs existed there were
only 23 hours in a day we live next to a
mega mode and around 1/4 of the size of
Earth the moon is pretty enormous
relative to other satellites out there
there's nothing quite like this
situation anywhere else in the universe
Pluto has a moon that's almost as half
as big as itself but it's more like a
twin than a satellite there are more
than 150 moons in our solar system and
Earth's is the fifth largest out of the
whole lot birds can create clouds when
looking for somewhere to roost
hundreds men even thousands of starlings
sometimes form into huge flocks that
resemble living clouds the largest ever
cloud or murmuration contained around 6
million birds incredibly when flying
like this the starlings never bump into
each other because each bird focuses on
the movement of 6 or 7 other nearby
birds but exactly how they synchronize
everything so well still has scientists
scratching their heads earth is not
quite round Isaac Newton first suggested
that Earth was not a perfect sphere in
1687 like many of his other ideas it
turned out to be true basically we live
on a squashed soccer ball the world is
flatter at the top and bottom and bulges
out a little in the middle like me
but it only bulges by about 13 miles so
its belly is really tiny considering the
Earth's size this unusual shape is
caused by the way the Earth spins
speaking of which we're all turning at
different speeds imagine a basketball
spinning on someone's finger a point
near the middle of the ball takes longer
to spend back to where it started
then the spot where your finger is earth
spins in much the same way people in the
center of Africa are turning at 1,000
miles per hour as the planet rotates
well anyone at the South Pole doesn't
really move at all other than rotating
in place at the same time we're all
moving forward through space equally
fast since the planet is also hurtling
around the Sun at 67,000 miles per hour
whew Antarctica is a desert any place
that gets very little water each year is
considered a desert the inner regions of
Antarctica get just two inches of water
per year and because it's roughly as big
as the USA and Mexico combined
Antarctica is actually the largest
desert in the world gravity is not the
same everywhere the rocks metals and
other minerals and things that make up
the planet are packed into the ground
more tightly in certain places than in
others this has surprising consequences
gravity varies slightly depending on
where you are you weigh 1/2 of 1% less
standing at the equator than you do at
the poles in most cases that's a
difference of less than 1 pound how high
up you are also has an effect so if you
were at the top of Mount Everest
you'd also weigh slightly less don't
look down earth could have been purple
before it turned blue and green one
scientist has a theory that a substance
existed in ancient microbes before
chlorophyll that's a thing that makes
plants green evolved on earth the
substance reflected sunlight as red and
violet colors which combine to make
purple if true the young Earth may have
been teeming with strange purple colored
critters before all the green stuff
appeared
Earth's toughest living thing is so
small you can't see it water bears also
known as moss piglets are cute little
creatures with eight legs and squashed
up heads that are less than a hundredth
of an inch in length
despite their microscopic stature they
can basically survive anywhere they
prefer bits of wet moss or the bottom of
a lake but they won't complain if you
put them somewhere really uncomfortable
they can endure extreme cold and
incredible heat and survive both huge
pressure and high radiation some of the
little bears once even managed to
survive unprotected in outer space for
10 days without a problem they handle
all these things by rolling up into a
ball and hibernating which reduces their
need for oxygen and food earth is hotter
went further away from the Sun in July
when we're about 94 million miles from
the Sun the world is about 36 degrees
warmer overall than in January when
we're three million miles closer this is
because there's more dry land in the
northern half of the planet than in the
southern half and land tends to heat up
more than water during the northern
summer in July more land is heated up
than in January so the planet gets a
little warmer at this time even though
we're further from our source of heat we
can't dig up most of Earth's gold 99% of
it ended up in the center of the planet
several billion years ago attracted by
the iron in Earth's core we're talking
about 1.6 quadrillion tons of gold here
that's enough to coat the entire planet
surface in one and a half feet of the
stuff and if all those meteorites hadn't
leader smashed into the ground bringing
extra amounts of gold it would be even
more rare you could fall right through
the earth if someone could dig a tunnel
straight into the center of the planet
and out the opposite side and you are
adventurous enough to jump into it it
would take you 42 straight minutes to
fall to the other end
you'd speed up as you fell reaching a
maximum speed by the time you reach
SCOR after the halfway point you would
then fall upwards getting slower and
slower by the time you reach the
opposite surface your speed would be
back to zero unless you managed to climb
out of the hole you'd immediately start
falling again back down or up to the
other side of the planet this trip would
go on forever all thanks to the weird
effects of gravity Earth's greatest
living achievement is a fungus the
largest single living thing in the world
turns out to be a mushroom in Oregon
this enormous honey mushroom lives in
Malheur National Forest and covers an
area of 3.7 square miles it could be as
much as eight and a half thousand years
old you could be forgiven for missing it
though since most of it's hidden
underground when the roots of individual
honey mushrooms meet they can fuse
together to become a single fungus which
explains how this one got so big if you
could gather together all that mushroomy
stuff into one big ball it could weigh
as much as 35,000 tons that's about as
much as 200 gray whales hope they like
mushrooms the sun's heat is beneath our
feet scientists have figured out that
Earth's core is actually as hot as the
surface of the Sun around ten thousand
eight hundred degrees one of the reasons
it's so incredibly hot down there is
because earth is still shedding heat
from when it was created billions of
years ago
also when an object as big as Mars
slammed into the young earth it not only
created the moon so goes the theory but
melted the surface of the planet and a
lot of that extra heat is probably still
stored inside the core but there's no
need to worry the planets core is harder
for us to access than it is to probe the
surface of Pluto in fact chances are we
may never develop technology that could
physically reach the core you can eat
your way to the core of an apple though
you can find more viruses on earth than
stars in the sky earth is home to around
a quadrillion quadrillion or 1000
million separate viruses that means they
outnumber the
total number of stars in the entire
universe and there's enough of them to
form a line 10 million light years long
aside from being so mind-boggling
numerous viruses are downright weird
things we can't really say they're alive
since they don't have cells and don't
need food but they can reproduce and
evolve